

===== PAGE 1 =====

x —le/21 [re21—wsgrt OY. 29.12.2023

Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities (Edible
Oils & Fats) contained in any Package

Issued on: .

15.01.2023 Preparen by" :

Rev. No.: 00 Approved by : Page-1
1. Background

To comply with the Legal Metrology Rules.

Legal Metrology,
Department of
Consumer Affairs

2. Purpose:

The purpose is to lay down, the standard procedure, guidelines to be followed by
the industry and by the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer authorized by
or under the Act, to determine the net quantity of commodity (Edible Oils & Fats)
contained in any package.

3. Scope:

This document & procedure is applicable whenever the Director, Controller or any
Legal Metrology Officer authorized by or under the Act, draws any sample from any
manufacturing plant /in transit/ CFA/market for determination of the net quantity of
packed Commodity (edible oils & fats) or to confirm any other requirement specified
under Legal Metrology Rules/guidelines /advisories .

PROCEDURE:

Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities in Packages
Part-I - Equipment

1. Equipments required- (1) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer
authorized by or under the Act, to determine the net quantity; of commodity contained
in any package, shall be provided by the concerned Government with adequate
equipments and facilities to carry out his work to the required degree of accuracy in
an Expedient and efficient manner.
(2) The equipments, referred to in sub-paragraph (1), shall ordinarily consist of working
standard weights and balances, or any other weight or measure declared by the Director
to be suitable for determining the net quantity contained in the concerned package.
(3) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall, before determining the
net quantity contained in any package, ensure that the working standards and other
equipments are functioning properly.

2. Working standards to be ordinarily used.-(1) Ordinarily, working standards and
other weights and measures, duly verified shall be used for determining the net
quantities contained in packages and the errors, if any, in relation to the net quantity
declared on the package.

Provided that, where it is necessary to use the weights and measures, owned or
controlled by the manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer as the case may be such
weights and measures, shall be used unless the maximum permissible error of such

AQT QSH AGAR
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Department of Consumer Affairs
Govt. of India Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001

ublic Distribution


===== PAGE 2 =====

Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities (Edible

Oils & Fats) in Packages

Issued on: ; .
15.01.2023 es le |
Rev. No.: 00 Approved by : |

weights and measures is twenty per cent or less of the maximum error permitted n
relation to the net quantity of the commodity contained in the packages.

(2) It shall be the duty of every manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer to render
such assistance the Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer as the Director
or other authorized person may require in order carrying out his duties expeditiously and
efficiently.

(3) Where any weight, measure or other equipment, owned or controlled by the
manufacturer, packer or wholesale dealer is used by the Director, Controller or any
Legal Metrology Officer for the determination or the net quantity contained in any
package, such weight, measure or other equipment shall not be released by the Director
or other authorized person until his work is completed.

Part-II - Instructions with regard to the determination of quantity and error
at manufacturer's or packer's premises.

3. (1) If empty tare packages are available, one such package shall be taken and tare
package weight determined. If the tare package weight is equal to or less than three-
tenths of the maximum permissible error for the concerned commodity of that quantity,
it shall be assumed that the tare package weight so determined is valid for all the
other packages in the sample, and the sample packages shall then be weighed for
gross weight, and thereafter the net weight of commodity contained in each package
shall be obtained by subtracting the tare package weight from the gross package
weight. If the tare package weight so determined is more than three tenths
of the maximum permissible error in relation to the commodity for that quantity, weight
of four emptier tare packages shall be determined. If the difference between the
maximum tare package weight and the minimum tare package weight of the five
samples is equal to or less than four tenths of the maximum permissible error allowed
for that commodity for that quantity, the tare weight of the package shall be taken as
equal to the average of the five tare package weights. The gross weight of the package
in the sample shall then be determined and the average tare package weight shall be
subtracted from the gross package weight to obtain the net contents of the commodity
in each package, in the sample. However, when the difference in the five individual tare
weights of the packages exceeds the limit of four tenths of the maximum permissible
error specified above, the procedure specified in sub-paragraph (4) or sub-paragraph
(5), as the case may be, shall be adopted for determining the net quantity of individual
packages.

(2) In the absence of empty tare packages, one package from the sample shall be
opened and the net weight of the commodity and the tare weight of the package
determined. If the tare weight of the package is equal to or less than three-tenth of the
maximum permissible error for that concerned commodity of that quantity, it shall be
assumed that the tare weight of one package so determined is valid for all the other
packages in the sample, and the remaining packages shall then be weighed for arose

A fhe 2

Legal Metrology,
Department of
Consumer Affairs

9 ISH AGARWAL
_ z - Deputy Director & IM Directot (Legal Metrology)
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
Department of Consumer Affairs
Govt. of India Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-119001


===== PAGE 3 =====

Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities (Edible

Oils & Fats) in Packages

Issued on: a ;
15.01.2023 Prepared by FS
Rev. No.: 00 Approved by : po

weight, and thereafter the net weight of commodity contained in each package shall be
obtained by subtracting the tare weight from the gross weight.
(3) If the tare weight of the package specified in sub-paragraph (2) is more than
three-tenths of the maximum permissible error in relation to that commodity, four
more packages in the samples shall be opened and the net weight of the commodity
in each package as well as the tare weight of each package shall be determined. If the
difference between the maximum tare weight and the minimum tare weight of five
samples is equal to or less than four-tenths of the maximum permissible error for that
commodity of that quantity, the tare weight of the package shall be taken as equal to
the arithmetic mean of the five tare weights. The gross weight of the packages in the
sample shall then be determined to the requisite accuracy and the average tare weight
of the contained shall be subtracted from the gross weight to obtain the net contents of
the commodity in each package in the sample.
(4) Where it is found on examining the first package, as described in sub-paragraph (2)
that the tare weight of the container exceeds the limits specified in sub-paragraph (2)
and sub-paragraph (3) and the determination of net contents, cannot be carried out
without opening the remaining packages, or it is not, possible to use the procedure to
use the procedure described in sub-paragraph (5) the size of the sample to be
examined shall be restricted to that indicated in column (2) , in accordance with the
lot indicated in column (1) of Table of the Fifth Schedule and the determination of net
quantity shall be carried out by opening all the packages in the sample.
(5) Where it is likely that the process of determination of the actual net quantity may be
destructive and it is possible to feed empty package into the packing process without
affecting the results, the following procedure shall be used:
(a) the number of empty packages, depending upon the size of the lot, in accordance
with columns (1) and (2) of Table of the Fifth Schedule shall be selected;
(b) the empty package shall be marked suitably to identify them from the other
packages;
(c) the weight of each empty package, with its other parts which are to be fitted on it
after it is filled shall be determined and the weight suitably recorded on the empty
package and also on the Form specified in the Seventh Schedule;
(d) the empty package shall then be filled by introducing them in a random manner in
the packing process, and such introduction shall be adequately spread over the
duration in accordance with which ;the size of the lot is determined;
(e) the marked packages shall be taken out after completion of the filling and sealing
operations and each such filled package shall be weighed again to the requisite
accuracy;
(f) the net quantity shall be obtained by deducting the tare weight determined in
accordance with clause (c) from the gross weight.
(6) The Director, Controller or any Legal Metrology Officer shall enter results of this
examination of gross weight, net weight and tare weight in the Form specified in the
Athntoary A AVARWAL
 & . epsaaletaite Gr (Legal Metroiogy)
‘linistry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
Department of Consumer Affairs
Gov. of India Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-19004

Legal Metrology,
Department of
Consumer Affairs



===== PAGE 4 =====

Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities (Edible
Oils & Fats) in Packages

Issued on: a .
15.01.2023 Prepared by : PF
Rev. No.: 00 Approved by : Po

Seventh Schedule along with such other observation as he may wish to make on the
basis of his examination.

4. Determination of (Edible oils & Fats) Volumetric packed commodities Net
Contents by declared weight on Pack. -(1) In case of edible oils & fats being
packed in volumetric packs, the net quantity shall be estimated by their equivalent
weight only. The standard specific gravity conversion factors to be adopted for (a) soft
oils shall be 910 g for i1Litre at 30 deg C, (b) other than soft oils like palm-based oils &
fats, vanaspati etc. shall be 893 g for 1 Litre at 50 deg (c) ghee shall be - 900g at 45
deg C. The procedure adopted for measuring weight of edibles oils & fats shall be
applied here as well.

Legal Metrology,
Department of
Consumer Affairs

(2) The reading of the actual net declared weight the Edible oils & Fat’s commodity in
every package shall be noted carefully and recorded in the Form specified in the
Seventh Schedule.

5. Declaration of unit sale price: The unit sale price required under rule 6 of the
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 shall mandatorily be declared in
weight. However, it may be declared additionally in volume also.

THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
FormA
Weight Checking — Data Sheet
A
Particulars of Package Name of Manufacturer/ Packer
Address Price Month Year
B Lot Size: Sample Size:
Commodity Classification Schedule First/ Second
Class A/ B
Maximum permissible error in percentage
*Lot size:
Sample size: Maximum
permissible error (g)
(ei Sample Gross Tare Net Remarks
No. Weight Weight Weight/ error
Weight 1
Checking Data 200

Deputy oS gp “gales poy)
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Féod arid Public Distribution
Department of Consumer Affairs
Govt. of india Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-1 19004


===== PAGE 5 =====

Determination of the Net Quantity of Commodities (Edible
Oils & Fats) in Packages

Decactmentat iesuereait Prepared by :
15.01.2023 ;

Consumer Affairs |
Rev. Date: Reviewed by : Pe
Rev. No.: 00 Approved by : Po

D
Results

_———

Declared Wt. Avg. Wt.

E

GENERAL COMMENTS WITH REGARD TO THE
COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACT AND THE RULES MADE
THEREUNDER

F

Signature and name of the Signature and name of manufacturer/
authorized person packer authorized by manufacturer or

any competent witness

Place:
Designation:
Name:

Time:

Note: If the data sheet runs into more pages than one, the each continuation sheet shall bear the signatures specified in Part F.

At aX Ayy* —s

29|irfrors

ASHUTOSH AGARWAL
Deputy Director & I/C Director (Legal Metrology)
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
Department of Consumer Affairs
Govt. of India Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-*0C01
