

===== PAGE 1 =====

I-10/17/2023-W&M
Government of India
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food &Public Distribution
Department of Consumer Affairs
Legal Metrology Division
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-01
Dated: 10.7.2023
To,
The Controller of Legal Metrology,
All States / UTs

Subject: Provisions of the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 on Medical
Devices -reg.

Sir,

The undersigned is directed to refer to the above mentioned subject and to state that
Rule 26 of the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 provides exemption from
the Rules, that:

"26. Exemption in respect of certain packages. -Nothing contained in these rules shall apply
to any package containing a commodity if—...

(c) it contains scheduled formulations and non-scheduled formulations covered under the Drugs
(Price Control) Order, 2013 made under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of
1955):

Provided that no exemption shall be applicable to medical devices declared as drugs."

2. Rule 6(1)(e) of the Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011 provides that:

"(e) the retail sale price of the package, shall clearly indicate that it is the maximum retail price
inclusive of all taxes in Indian currency:

Provided that for packages containing alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquor, the State Excise
Laws and the rules made there under shall be applicable within the State in which it is
manufactured and where the state excise laws and rules made there under do not provide for
declaration of retail sale price, the provisions of these rules shall apply.

Provided further that if the retail sale price of any essential commodity is fixed and
notified by the Competent Authority under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 the
same shall apply.”

3. Therefore, it is requested to issue suitable directions to your field Officers to ensure the
compliance of the provisions of Rules. If the prices are allowed to be revised by the
Government/ NPPA/ any other Statutory Body, then the industries may be allowed to revise the
prices as per the Notification issued by Government/ NPPA/ any other Statutory Body.

Yours faithfully >

Aghistoe wet

(Ashutosh Agarwal)

Deputy Director (Legal Metrology)
Phone 011-23389489

Email: ashutosh.agarwal13@nic.in

ae
